# Human practices
## Introduction

Another important aspect that needs some consideration are the patients themselves. 
We contacted several health institutions and patient organizations in order to gather information that can be used in the design of our application.
An interview was conducted with professor Steven Laureys, Director of the coma science group and the brain center at the university hospital of Liège and cofounder of the Mindcare international foundation,
and with Ujwal Chaudhary, post doctoral researcher in Tübingen and founder of ALS voice.

## Interview 

+ What is your expertise and how are you linked to people with locked in syndrome (LIS) (how are you linked to patients in general that benefit from applications like this one) ?
  + Steven: Hello. My name is Stephen Laureys. I'm a neurologist director of the Giga Consciousness Research Unit at the University of Liege and also director of a clinical center that's the brain center at the University Hospital in Liege, where we see patients with severe brain injury. We use all these possible technologies to first of all, help getting the diagnosis right, predicting the outcome, and of course, developing new therapeutic possibilities. We also collaborate with patient organizations. I co founded Mind Care International Foundation, so that brings together patients and families who survived coma. we did a number of research projects on quality of life, and the needs of these patients and families.
  + Ujwal: Hello my name is Ujwal Chaudhary. I’m the founder of ALS voice, a non-profit organization. Many individuals lose the ability to speak due to ALS, MS, stroke, traumatic brain injury, and other disorders. When a patient can use their eye for communication with the rest of the body in a paralyzed state, they are in a so-called locked-in state. In the case of ALS, most individuals’ disorder progresses until they lose control of their eye muscles, then they are said to be in a “completely locked-in state”. These individuals are left without means of communication, thereby unable to express their needs, desires, and wishes.
We work with ALS patients which are in such a critical situation. With ALS voice we offer consultation, support and enable communication using neurotechnology.

+ Did you already come into contact with BCI’s and what is your experience?
  + Steven: we published three papers with colleagues from Leuven and China. [Paper1](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25082743/) [paper2](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24838215/) [paper3](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24086289/) But these were really research projects. So we got a paper, it did not help patients at home, in nursing homes or rehab centers. So I think this is the big challenge now. So we've been publishing hundreds of papers on how neurotechnology helps at the level of the diagnosis, the prognosis, the management and clinical care, including communication. But I think really now we need to move into the next step, and that is offering these patients plug and play systems. So I'm very happy. We collaborate with GTech in Austria and they have the first commercially available system, which is called Mindbeagle, that uses both auditory, visual and somatosensory. But of course, we need more systems. And so I definitely think that despite that this is a niche, there's not, of course, many patients that can benefit from this. The impact you have with these devices in terms of their quality of life communication, it really gives these patients a voice, it gives them the possibility to connect with others, including social media. And I think that's tremendously important.
+ What do you think would be the pros and cons of giving LIS patients access to social media?
Follow-up question: Do you think that the patients would suffer from seeing everybody living their ‘best life’ on social media? Would the negative effects be enhanced in LIS patients compared to other people? (depression, FOMO)
  + Steven: There are many challenges but, if you ask patients, I think they would be terribly happy and these are really minor problems as compared to what they're going through. You can only imagine what it is like to be paralyzed in a bed depending on others for all activities of daily living, eating, getting dressed, washing. So I wouldn't worry too much and they're smart enough to go there. And of course, they know other people can walk around and have different lives. So I really see the positive effects that are hugely more important than those concerns and ethical challenges. There's, you know, big things that need consideration. But overall, I think and from experience, it's now 25 years that we do this. I think I can say that they are tremendously happy not only to participate in a research project, but of course to see a device that really is useful in everyday life and would permit them to connect to other people through the internet.
  + Ujwal: It’s very important for these patients to be able to maintain their social interactions, this is crucial for their quality of life. So giving them a way to be able to have a voice and interact with their environment is priceless. You need to consider that these patients are completely locked in their own body so giving them a chance of regaining some of their independence and a way of interacting is a strong motivator for them. When you are in a situation like that the problems of daily life become a bit minor. Of course again this depends from patient to patient how they will be affected. But overall there are way more benefits than negative aspects.
+ Would access to social media improve the quality of their social interactions?
  + Steven: it turned out that quality of life correlated with the capacity to connect to others. And so I think that that study tells us what you do is important and we need those technologies to, first of all, give them a voice, give them the capacity to express their own thoughts and wishes to the ones around them. But then, of course, also with the Internet to other people in the community, and of course, for them, social media and the Internet really is a window to the world. And there's a lot of personal differences there. Of course, some people would not like this. That's just the same as for all of us. But giving them possibilities to connect and to express what they are experiencing. And their wishes to control their environment, I think, is just tremendously positive and directly and significantly impacts and improves their quality of life and well-being.
+ What other tools provided by the internet would be of use for the patients? Wikipedia, google translate ,…
  + Steven: it turned out that quality of life correlated with the capacity to connect to others. And so I think that that study tells us what you do is important and we need those technologies to, first of all, give them a voice, give them the capacity to express their own thoughts and wishes to the ones around them. But then, of course, also with the Internet to other people in the community and and of course, for them, social media and the Internet really is a window to the world. Just giving them access to the internet is already a giant improvement for these patients. It probably depends on the patient what they are interested in using. In general providing them access to platforms, like social media, which give them the ability for social interactions will be very useful.
+ What do you think is the maximum response time between actions before the patients would feel disengaged or frustrated to use the application?
  + Steven: It's very difficult because again, this is a range of possible limitations and global and focal attention, general arousal and motivation of patients is tremendously important. So as with the Coma Science Group, we are studying these locked-in patients now for over two decades and I've never seen people who were as motivated as them. So we put them in functional MRI scans. They can't move and you know, they're paralyzed, but they would have these invalid movements. They would need to do tasks that are really demanding. And they did extremely well because they really were extremely motivated. How quicker the application works, the better, of course. But as you know, it's a tradeoff. If you want to make it very quick, you're going to make more errors and then it's going to be more frustrating. So I would say a very flexible system that permits us to adapt really continuously and learn and improve. We know patients are very happy to participate in these novel developments.
  + Ujwal: What we have experienced is that these patients are very motivated to participate in experiments or research in this field. It gives them a perspective of hope that they can regain the ability to communicate. They are very patient so I don’t think that the response time of your application is the most important aspect. Something that I myself have experienced is that wrong actions of the application really can frustrate the patients and then they will lose their interest and focus. From an engineering point of view you always try to find the best balance between accuracy and speed, but I recommend to focus first on accuracy rather than on the speed of the application. 
+ Are the caretakers willing to go through the hustle to put on the EEG headset for this application?
  + Steven: Well, as we know, hospitals suffer from lack of personnel. So we can't ask nurses to be trained and put extra time in this. I believe that the very strong partner is actually the patient and the family. So they are, I think, a very important actor here. I believe that the challenge is to translate the best possible hardware, software. The technical people would just help family members or caregivers who come at home but then rather private as compared to hospitals where there is already a problem of understaffing.
  + Ujwal: Whenever we want to conduct an experiment on a patient we are completely on our own. The caretakers are busy with making sure that the patient is as healthy as possible and they do not have the time to help set up experiments or stuff like that. I probably see this the same way for your application. However we always see that the family of the patient is very eager to be able to help so I think you have to look at them for installing the eeg cap. When you are designing the headset you want to use, make sure that there’s a manual or a standardized way to put it on the patient. In this way the family of the patient can do this on their own but in a way that the electrodes are always in the right position and the best results are obtained.
+ Do patients have any specific constraints (have to lay on the back of their head, use a headrest, issues with eye strain or eye movement, interfering life support equipment, …) that make it harder for them to stare at a screen for e.g. an hour with an EEG-cap on?
  + Steven: Definitely. Also, there is a world of difference between making your BCI work in a healthy volunteer as compared to a patient. So you're looking at a signal that's very weak as compared to muscle electrical activity, as compared to currents generated through eye movements. These patients are sweating. These patients, they're paralyzed. But yet there's a lot of involuntary movement, tearing movement, spasticity in the neck. The head is difficult to control. So that is for you guys a nightmare. So you would need to work with all of those challenges in patients who, well, can lay down, can sit. So how do you put the electrodes on the back of the head? All of these things are an extra challenge. If people have a lot of hair it is a big challenge to make contact with the skin. So that's why, of course, the forehead is wonderful. You've got a couple of places where you can put your electrodes. Only those where you have your steady state visually full potential. So yeah, these are issues and of course your electrodes and active electrodes and dry electrodes and all of that is getting better. And yet the fundamental problem is still there. You're trying to listen to a mouse during a rock concert, basically. And algorithms are there to focus on what you think is the signal coming from the brain. But sometimes it's an artifact. You get false positives and you will need to deal with that. It's a big issue. And then, of course, there's the false negative. Sometimes there's a patient, you know, it should work and you just can't see any brain related single. And then you would need to repeat. So why I like BCI. That's compared with a lot of studies with functional MRI. We published in Science the New England Journal of Medicine that we can communicate with them by imagining movements and so on and so forth. But that's not practical. Patients need to come to the expert center. I can only do it once. And we've shown also that these patients fluctuate. So this is true for coma survivors. We called minimally conscious state patients. It's also true for locked in syndrome patients. They have this outrage, windows of opportunity where you could use the EEG and things like entropy or other markers of global arousal that may help us to identify which is the best moment to make this work and you should be able to repeat it again and again. We've shown that you should see patients at least five times before you can say it doesn't work. So all of this makes it difficult. So you best keep it simple, keep it very practical, keep it very rapid in terms of the installation, the training, the recording. And then you should go a couple of times to make sure, you know, maybe this patient is better in the morning. In the afternoon, what about the impact of physiotherapy? Then they can be exhausted. The drugs they take against epilepsy. Again, spasticity can also make them drowsy. So there's many, many caveats there.
  + Ujwal: The biggest constraint that we have with our experiments is not in the physical limits of the patient or that they are bedridden etcetera. Like for instance the mentalab headset that you guys are using is really soft and flexible and can be easily used with a patient lying in his bed. The biggest issue is that these patients are in homecare meaning that when we want to do an experiment we need to go ourselves to the patients home. We really need to think what equipment we can bring with us because we cannot bring all the equipment from the lab, so the measurements we can take are limited. Furthermore, will the quality of the signals be less good compared to when you can conduct the experiments in a lab setting.
+ What is the most amount of money that hospitals/ revalidation centres would spend on the purchase of a headset for this application?
  + Steven: Well, that's a difficult question. I think the cost is enormous. These patients are at risk of complications. Pulmonary infections. They go back to the hospital. So having ways to improve their quality of life and I think hands there their whole multidisciplinary rehab there will also be and it's hard to calculate economic benefits because a patient who is happy, who's motivated, who can interact, will just have less complications. And those impacts next to of course, the very important, humane and ethical impacts of improving their quality of life in terms of the money, the cheaper, the better, of course. But you will have agreements with insurance companies, with health care providers and patients, I think, and their families are very happy to spend on something that is, of course, not a life, you know, save for, as you say. And in a sense, it's incredibly important for them to get a window to the world and not be isolated, mute, paralyzed, and kind of neglected by society. So whether this is to connect to social media, whether it is to make art in whatever form which is also a possibility, what it is, is to just control their direct environment. I think it's very probable that it's worth a reasonable price. Of course, if it's not affordable for any of them, that would be a problem. But those things become cheaper and cheaper. We see it from the gaming industry because there is a big, big market and we benefit from the technologies which are being developed there.
  + Ujwal: Important to consider is that the device needs to be continuously updated in order to work. ALS is a disease which progresses and thus the eeg signals will also change. To keep the application working throughout the life of the patient you have to continuously monitor and update the way you detect the signals and the intended actions of the patients. With the mentalab device you are using and some personnel that works on the software and continuously adapts this for the patient and how his disease progresses, I estimate a cost of around 50.000 euros per year for the device. Hospitals are always in need of money so it will probably be sold to the patients directly. There’s definitely a big need for products like this so the family and the patient itself are willing to spend some money so that they can communicate again.

## Conclusion

The experts were, in general, really happy with the effort we made to develop a new application for their patients. They would also like to help us to bring the application to the patients after optimizing the application for healthy participants.





 
